c1--1.1 Commits to High Learning Expectations 
The teacher actively engages students in developing the instructional goals, activities, interactions, and classroom environment in order to set high and achievable learning expectations for all. 
The teacher plans the instructional goals, activities, interactions, and classroom environment in order to set high and achievable learning expectations for all. 
High and achievable learning expectations are emerging as the focus of the instructional goals, activities, interactions, and classroom environment. 
The teacher?s strategies and behaviors demonstrate low learning expectations for some or all students. 
c1--1.2 Promotes Pride & Effort 
The teacher actively promotes and provides opportunities for students to reflect on their efforts, learning habits and accomplishments in order to foster an intrinsic sense of pride in learning. 
The teacher often promotes student reflection on their efforts, learning habits and accomplishments in order to foster an intrinsic sense of pride in learning. 
The teacher occasionally suggests that students reflect on their efforts, learning habits and accomplishments in order to improve the quality of their work. 
The teacher provides little or no opportunity for student reflection on their efforts, learning habits and accomplishments. The teacher may actually discourage student effort through negative feedback or disparaging remarks. 
c1--1.3 Fosters Original & Creative Thinking 
The teacher?s instructional goals, plans and interactions create conditions that ensure students feel safe taking risks and applying higher order thinking skills in creative, original and appropriate ways. 
The teacher?s instructional goals and plans provide opportunities for students to feel safe taking risks and using higher order thinking skills in creative, original and appropriate ways. 
The teacher?s plans sometimes provide students with opportunities to use higher order thinking skills creatively, though activities may be more fully directed or result in outcomes that may not support instructional goals. 
The teacher does little to provide students with opportunities to use higher order thinking skills creatively in ways that support instructional goals. The classroom is not a safe place for students to take risks with divergent or creative expressions of learning. 
c1--1.4 Student Engagement 
The learning tasks and activities promote learning, require student thinking, and emphasize depth over breadth as appropriate to the content. Allows student choice as appropriate. 
The learning tasks and activities promote learning and student thinking and may emphasize depth over breadth as appropriate to the content. May allow student choice as appropriate. 
The learning tasks and activities are partially aligned with instructional outcomes but require only minimal thinking by students, allowing most students to be passive or merely compliant. 
The learning tasks and activities are poorly aligned with the instructional outcomes or require only rote responses.
c2--2.1 Daily & Unit Lesson Planning 
The teacher has daily and unit lesson plans which support state/national standards. Plans are regularly updated to align with relevant performance expectations/grade level expectations. 
The teacher has daily and unit lesson plans which support state/national standards. Plans are often updated to align with relevant performance expectations/grade level expectations. 
The teacher has begun to craft daily and unit lesson plans which support state/national standards and is working to align the plans with relevant performance expectations/grade level expectation 
Teacher has few or no lesson or unit plans focused on state/national standards or performance expectations/grade level expectations. 
c2--2.2 Lesson Structure 
The teacher?s lesson structure is highly coherent, allowing for reflection and closure as appropriate. Pacing of the lesson is appropriate for all students. 
The teacher?s lesson has a defined structure around which the activities are organized. Pacing of the lesson is in synch with the needs of the student. 
The teacher?s lesson has a recognizable structure, though it is not uniformly maintained throughout the lesson. Pacing of the lesson is out of synch with the needs of the student. 
The teacher?s lesson has no defined structure. Pacing of the lesson is inappropriate for most or all students. 
c2--2.3 Instructional Grouping 
The teacher establishes clear collaborative guidelines and roles for students. Groups work independently, are highly engaged and productive at all times, with students taking responsibility for learning. 
The teacher establishes clear collaborative guidelines and roles for students. Group tasks are well organized and managed so that most students are engaged and productive participants in their learning. 
The teacher is developing collaborative guidelines and roles for students. Group tasks are managed so that most students are productively participating. 
The teacher establishes few or no collaborative guidelines and roles for students. Group productivity and ontask behavior are dependent on direct teacher oversight. 
c2--2.4 Directions & Procedures 
The teacher?s directions and procedures are clear, coherent and time-efficient. Directions anticipate possible student misunderstanding. 
The teacher?s directions and procedures are clear, coherent and time-efficient. Directions often anticipate possible student misunderstanding. 
The teacher?s directions and procedures are usually clear and time-efficient. Directions do not always anticipate possible student misunderstanding. 
The teacher?s directions and procedures are often or always confusing to students. 
c2--2.5 Transitions 
Transitions between class activities are seamless, resulting in more ontask time and learning. Students have assumed responsibility for efficient classroom operation. 
Transitions between class activities are often seamless, resulting in more on-task time and learning. 
Transitions between class activities are sometimes ragged, resulting in more off-task behavior. 
Transitions between class activities are nearly always ragged, resulting in down time and off-task behavior. 
c2--2.6 Learning Conversations 
The teacher?s questions are of uniformly high quality and sensibly paced. Students assume considerable responsibility for the success of the discussion by initiating relevant topics and making unsolicited contributions. 
Most of the teacher?s questions are of high quality and sensibly paced. Students assume some responsibility for the success of the discussion by initiating relevant topics and making contributions. 
The teacher?s questions are a combination of low and high quality. Students may engage in relevant discussion with considerable teacher prompting. 
The teacher?s questions are of poor quality. Interaction between teacher and students is controlled entirely by the teacher in order to maintain relevance. 
c2--2.7 Lesson Improvement 
The teacher actively reviews lessons regularly and seeks best practices with colleagues to identify areas in which he or she can take positive steps toward more focused, effective, and engaging instruction. 
The teacher actively reviews lessons regularly and seeks best practices to identify areas in which he or she can take positive steps toward more focused, effective instruction. 
The teacher is working to review lessons regularly and may, when advised by colleagues or a supervisor, make use of best practices to improve instruction. 
The teacher does not review lessons regularly. When directed by a supervisor, the teacher may follow steps to improve instruction. However, generally, he or she does not acknowledge the need for improvement.
c2--3.1 Student Prior Knowledge 
Teacher?s lesson plans and instruction reflect understanding of students? prior knowledge and anticipate possible student misunderstandings. 
Teacher?s lesson plans and instruction reflect understanding of students? prior knowledge. 
Teacher?s lesson plans and instruction indicate some awareness of students? prior knowledge. 
Teacher?s lesson plans and instruction display little understanding of students? prior knowledge. 
c2--3.2 Students? Special Needs 
Teacher?s plans address students? special learning and medical needs, collecting such information from a variety of sources. 
Teacher?s plans address students? special learning and medical needs. 
Teacher?s plans display awareness of students? special learning or medical needs, but such knowledge may be incomplete or inaccurate. 
Teacher?s plans display little or no understanding of students? special learning or medical needs or why such knowledge is important. 
c2--3.3 Instructional Strategies 
Teacher seeks and implements effective approaches for the learning needs of all students, using an extensive repertoire of strategies and soliciting additional resources from the school. 
Teacher seeks and implements approaches for the learning needs of all students, possessing a moderate repertoire of instructional strategies. 
Teacher accepts responsibility for the learning needs of all students but is unsure of how to address those learning needs. 
When a student has difficulty learning, the teacher either gives up or blames the students or the environment for the student?s lack of success or chooses not to seek knowledge about how to address student?s needs. 
c2--3.4 Response to Student Interest 
Meaningful student questions or interests are accommodated in the lesson. Students initiate or adapt activities and projects to enhance their understanding. 
Meaningful student questions or interests are accommodated in the lesson. 
Teacher is learning how to accommodate student questions and interests. 
Student questions and interests are ignored or brushed aside. 
c4--4.1 District & State Standards 
The teacher consistently applies state expectations, district curriculum, and assessment as the foundation for the development of units, lessons and classroom based assessments. 
The teacher utilizes state expectations, district curriculum, and assessments as guides in lesson planning on an on-going basis. 
The teacher is up-to-date on state expectations, district curriculum, and assessments and uses them periodically in lesson planning. 
The teacher has little knowledge of state expectations, district curriculum, nor assessments and/or doesn?t address/utilize them in lesson planning. 
c4--4.2 Content Knowledge 
Teacher displays extensive content knowledge and makes connections within and across the curriculum. 
Teacher displays solid content knowledge, making connections within the curriculum. 
Teacher relies on prepared curricular content sources and displays no additional knowledge. 
Teacher does not know or has very limited knowledge of the content. 
c4--4.3 Content-Related Pedagogy 
The teacher seeks and incorporates best practices on an on-going basis from a variety of sources within the discipline. The teacher is able to consistently anticipate areas within the content that students may find challenging and is prepared to provide clarity. 
The teacher?s pedagogy reflects current research on best practices within the discipline, often anticipating areas of student difficulty. 
The teacher displays rudimentary pedagogical knowledge. The teacher does not anticipate areas of student difficulty. 
The teacher demonstrates little understanding of pedagogy and best practices in the content area. The teacher is resistant to change. 
c4--4.4 Interdisciplinary Integration 
Teacher always integrates reading, writing, communication and mathematics and intentionally teaches lessons and assesses in these skills as needed. 
Teacher regularly integrates reading, writing, communication and mathematics skills when designing lessons and assessments. Teacher incorporates instruction on these skills as needed. 
Teacher includes process skills in student assignments and in assessment, but does not regularly instruct these skills. 
Teacher?s objectives include content knowledge only. Process skills are neither addressed in instruction nor assessed. 
c4--4.5 Presentation of Subject Matter Content 
Presentation of content is appropriate and links well with students? knowledge and experience. Teacher?s presentation often shows creativity. 
Presentation of content is appropriate and links well with students? knowledge and experience. 
Presentation of content is inconsistent in quality: some is done skillfully, with good examples; other portions are difficult to follow. 
Presentation of content is inappropriate and unclear or uses poor examples and analogies. 
c5--5.1 Teacher Interactions with Students 
Teacher demonstrates genuine caring and respect for the individual dignity of students and demonstrates an understanding of a student?s unique personal and educational background. The positive learning culture is intentionally inviting. 
Teacher-student interactions are friendly and demonstrate general respect for the dignity of students. A positive learning culture is present. 
Teacher-student interactions are generally appropriate and respectful but may reflect inconsistencies, favoritism or disregard for students? cultures. The learning culture is not always positive. 
Teacher interactions with some students are inappropriate to the age, gender, or culture of the student. There is no attention given to establishing a positive learning culture. 
c5--5.2 Student Interactions with Students 
Standards of conduct are clear to all students and appear to have been developed with student participation. Student interactions are polite and respectful supporting each other?s learning. 
Standards of conduct are clear to all students. Student interactions are generally polite and respectful. 
Standards of conduct appear to have been established and most students understand them. Disrespectful student behavior may be tolerated at times. 
No standards of conduct appear to have been established and students are unclear as to what the standards are. Student interactions are characterized by conflict, sarcasm, put-downs, or disrespect. 
c5--5.3 Monitoring of Student Behavior 
Monitoring by teacher is subtle and preventive. Students monitor their own and their peers? behavior, correcting one another respectfully. 
Teacher is aware of student behavior and monitors student activities at all times. 
Teacher is generally aware of student behavior but may miss the activities of some students. 
Student behavior is not monitored or students are left unattended. The teacher is unaware of what students are doing. 
c5--5.4 Response to Student Misbehavior 
Teacher response to misbehavior is highly effective and sensitive to students? individual needs. 
Teacher response to misbehavior is consistently appropriate and respects the students? dignity. 
Teacher attempts to respond to student misbehavior but with uneven results. 
Teacher does not respond to misbehavior, or the response is inconsistent, overly repressive, or does not respect the students? dignity. 
c5--5.5 Accessing Support Services 
Teacher takes responsibility for maintaining classroom discipline, but recognizes when administrators, parents, and other support services should be utilized. 
Teacher handles classroom discipline issues appropriately, and usually recognizes when additional support services are needed. 
Teacher recognizes discipline issues and may over or under utilize other support services. 
Teacher does not recognize and/or address discipline problems, or may recognize discipline problems but does not utilize additional support services. 
c5--5.6 Physical Environment 
_BLANK_
The classroom arrangement contributes to a positive learning culture. 
_BLANK_
The classroom arrangement is a detriment to a positive learning culture. 
c5--5.7 Equipment 
_BLANK_
The instructional space is safe. Equipment is maintained. Safety procedures are clearly communicated and monitored. 
_BLANK_
The instructional space is unsafe. Equipment is not maintained. Safety procedures are not communicated
c6--6.1 Assessment Tools 
The teacher uses a variety of assessments to effectively screen, diagnose and monitor for student learning progress. The teacher may initiate the process of creating, refining and/or evaluating appropriate assessment tools. 
The teacher uses a variety of assessments to effectively screen, diagnose and monitor for student learning progress. The teacher participates in creating, refining and/or evaluating appropriate assessment tools. 
The teacher has an understanding of assessment types and purposes. The teacher may not effectively use appropriate assessment tools. 
The teacher has little or no understanding of assessment types and purposes. The teacher neglects to use appropriate assessment tools. 
c6--6.2 Data-Driven Instructional Planning 
Based on data analysis, the teacher systemically makes meaningfully differentiated adjustments to lessons and units which improve student learning. 
Based on data analysis, the teacher usually plans meaningfully differentiated adjustments to lessons and units which improve student learning. 
Based on data analysis, the teacher sometimes plans meaningfully differentiated adjustments to lessons and/or units which improve student learning. 
The teacher rarely or never uses data analysis to make meaningfully differentiated adjustments to lessons and/or units. 
c6--6.3 Student Use of Data 
The teacher routinely expects and provides the tools for students to track their own progress, self reflect and set goals. 
The teacher provides opportunities for students to track their own progress. 
The teacher does not routinely provide opportunities for students to track their own progress. 
The teacher provides few or no opportunities for students to track their own progress. 
c6--6.4 Assessment Criteria 
The teacher provides assessment criteria and standards that are clear and have been directly communicated to students. There is evidence that students understand the purpose of assessment. 
The teacher provides assessment criteria and standards that are clear and have been directly communicated to students. 
The teacher provides assessment criteria and standards that have been developed, but they are not clear and/or have not been directly communicated to students. 
The teacher provides little or no clear criteria or standards for assessment. 
c6--6.5 Assessment Feedback 
The teacher consistently provides timely, objective, specific, and guided feedback to students directed at improving learning relative to established standards and the student?s learning goals. Students can provide similar peer feedback. 
The teacher consistently provides timely, objective, specific, and guided feedback to students directed at improving learning relative to established standards and the student?s learning goals. 
The teacher?s grasp of grade-level learning outcomes is developing and may result in feedback to students that is not always timely, objective, specific, or guided by established standards or the student?s learning goals. 
The teacher?s grasp of grade-level learning outcomes is weak and often results in feedback to students that is not timely, objective, specific, or guided by established standards or the student?s learning goals. 
c6--6.6 Data Analysis 
Individually and in teams, the teacher delves deeply into aggregated and disaggregated data to better understand classroom, district and state trends in order to proactively make adjustments to curriculum and instruction. 
Individually and in teams, the teacher works with aggregated and disaggregated data to better understand classroom and school trends in order to make improvements in curriculum and instruction. 
Individually and/or in teams, the teacher sometimes looks at aggregated and/or disaggregated data but may not see the trends and/or make appropriate adjustments to curriculum and instruction. 
The teacher rarely or never seeks out data for instructional reasons.
c7--7.1 Communicating Program Information 
The teacher communicates to parents in a systematic manner. Teacher teams and students participate in preparing materials for parents and stakeholders. 
The teacher communicates to parents in a systematic manner. 
The teacher is working to communicate in a systematic manner. 
The teacher communicates in a haphazard or inconsistent manner. 
c7--7.2 Communicating Student Progress 
The teacher provides meaningful information to families on both positive and negative aspects of student progress. The teacher anticipates family concerns and engages them consistently and professionally. 
The teacher provides meaningful information to families on both positive and negative aspects of student progress. The teacher?s engagement with family concerns is professional. 
The teacher adheres to the school?s required procedures for communicating to families. The teacher?s responses to family concerns may not always be meaningful or addressed professionally. 
The teacher lacks a grasp of what constitutes meaningful information and provides minimal information on student progress to families and does not respond or responds unprofessionally to family concerns about students. 
c7--7.3 Maintaining Accurate Records 
The teacher?s system for maintaining instructional and non-instructional information on students is standardized, regularly maintained and tied to district reporting systems. District resources are leveraged to make the information timely and meaningful. Students contribute information and interpretation of the records. 
The teacher?s system for maintaining instructional and non-instructional information on students is standardized, regularly maintained and tied to district reporting systems. District resources are leveraged to make the information timely and meaningful. 
The teacher?s system for maintaining instructional and non-instructional information is rudimentary and not completely tied to district reporting systems. District resources for reporting may be underutilized. 
The teacher has a nonstandard and/or ineffective system for maintaining instructional and noninstructional information and is not tied to district reporting systems. District resources for reporting are largely ignored.
c8--8.1 Performance Feedback 
The teacher is seen as a resource and model for the school community due to his or her practice of engaging with peers, supervisors, students and parents in seeking and sharing information to improve instructional practice and student learning. 
The teacher actively engages and cooperates with peers, supervisors, students and parents in collecting information as a means to improve instructional practice and student learning. 
The teacher accepts opportunities to and sees the relevance in listening to and sharing information with peers, supervisors, students and parents as a means to improve instructional practice and student learning. 
The teacher avoids opportunities to or denies the relevance of seeking and sharing information with peers, supervisors, students and parents as a means to improve instructional practice and student learning. 
c8--8.2 Collaboration 
Teacher takes a leadership role in team or departmental decision making and helps ensure that such decisions are based on improving instructional practice and student learning. 
Teacher has an open mind and participates in team or departmental decision making. The teacher professionally engages with schoolwide agreements and expectations in sustaining and refining common goals towards improving instructional practice and student learning. 
Teacher accepts his/her role in a collaborative and collegial environment, coming to an understanding of school-wide agreements and common expectations relevant to improving instructional practice and student learning. 
Teacher makes little or no effort to participate in collegial or collaborative relationships, avoids interacting with staff, and those interactions tend to be negative and/or self-serving. Teacher undermines common goals and school-wide agreements or expectations in a manner which is detrimental to instructional practice and student learning. 
c8--8.3 Professional Responsibilities 
Teacher regularly attends all required meetings and actively participates and engages in at least some aspect of school life such as committee work or extracurricular, co-curricular or student-centered activities in a balanced and professional manner. 
With few exceptions, teacher attends all required meetings and professionally participates.
With few exceptions, teacher attends all required meetings and is learning how to engage professionally in meetings. 
Teacher does not regularly attend and/or engage in required meetings and/or teacher may engage unprofessionally in meetings. 
c8--8.4 Substitute Lesson Planning 
_BLANK_
The teacher?s plans and preparation for guest teachers provide for continuity for student learning and communicate requisite safety and emergency preparedness information. 
_BLANK_
The teacher leaves either no plans for guest teachers or leaves plans that are incomplete, unclear and result in little productive learning as well as classroom