Criteria	CritShortName	Sequence	RowTitle	Description/Evidence	Level 1	Level 2	Level 3	Level 4
Using multiple student data elements to modify instruction and improve student learning.	C6	1	A1    Assessment for Student Learning – Assessment: Self-assessment of learning connected to the success criteria		Students are rarely or never given an opportunity to assess their own learning in relation to the success criteria for the learning target.	Students are occasionally given an opportunity to assess their own learning in relation to the success criteria for the learning target.	Students frequently assess their own learning in relation to the success criteria for the learning target.	Students consistently assess their own learning in relation to the success criteria and can determine where they are in connection to the learning target.
Using multiple student data elements to modify instruction and improve student learning.	C6	2	A2    Assessment for Student Learning – Assessment: Demonstration of learning		Assessments are not aligned with the learning targets.	"Assessment tasks are partially aligned with the learning targets, allowing students to demonstrate some understanding and/or skill related to the targets."	"Assessment tasks are aligned with the learning targets, allowing students to demonstrate their understanding and/or skill related to the learning targets."	Assessment tasks are aligned with the learning targets and allow students to demonstrate complex understanding and/or skill related to the learning targets.
Using multiple student data elements to modify instruction and improve student learning.	C6	3	A3    Assessment for Student Learning – Assessment: Formative assessment opportunities		Teacher rarely or never provides formative assessment opportunities during the lesson.	Teacher only provides formative assessment opportunities to determine students’ understanding of directions and task.	Teacher provides formative assessment opportunities that align with the learning target(s).	Teacher provides a variety of strategies for formative assessment that align with the learning target(s).
Using multiple student data elements to modify instruction and improve student learning.	C6	4	A4    Assessment for Student Learning – Assessment: Collection systems for formative assessment data		Teacher rarely or never uses an observable system and/or routines for recording formative assessment data.	Teacher has an observable system and routines for recording formative assessment data and occasionally uses the system for instructional purposes.	"Teacher has an observable system and routines for recording formative assessment data, uses multiple sources and frequently uses the system for instructional purposes."	"Teacher has an observable system and routines for recording formative assessment data, uses multiple sources and consistently uses the system for instructional purposes."
Using multiple student data elements to modify instruction and improve student learning.	C6	5	A5    Assessment for Student Learning – Assessment: Student use of assessment data		Students rarely or never use assessment data to assess their own learning.	"Students occasionally use assessment data to assess their own learning, determine learning goals and monitor progress over time."	"Students frequently use assessment data to assess their own learning, determine learning goals and monitor progress over time."	"Students consistently use assessment data to assess their own learning, determine learning goals and monitor progress over time."
Recognizing individual student learning needs and developing strategies to address those needs.	C3	5	A6    Assessment for Student Learning – Adjustments: Teacher use of formative assessment data		"Teacher rarely or never uses formative assessment data to make instructional adjustments, give feedback to students or modify lessons."	Teacher uses formative assessment data to modify future lessons.	"Teacher uses formative assessment data to make in-the-moment instructional adjustments, modify future lessons and give general feedback aligned with the learning target."	"Teacher uses formative assessment data to make in-the-moment instructional adjustments, modify future lessons and give targeted feedback aligned with the learning target to individual students."
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	1	CEC1    Classroom Environment & Culture – Use of Physical Environment: Arrangement of classroom		Physical environment of the room is unsafe and the arrangement gets in the way or distracts from student learning and the purpose of the lesson.	The physical environment is safe but the arrangement neither supports nor distracts from student learning or the purpose of the lesson.	"The physical environment is safe, and the arrangement supports student learning and the purpose of the lesson."	"The physical environment is safe, and the arrangement supports student learning and the purpose of the lesson. Teacher and students use the physical arrangement for learning."
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	2	CEC2    Classroom Environment & Culture – Use of Physical Environment: Accessibility and use of materials		"The resources, materials and technology in the classroom do not relate to the content or current units studied, or are not accessible to all students to support their learning during the lesson."	"The resources, materials and technology in the classroom relate to the content or current unit studied and are accessible to all students but are not referenced by teacher."	"The resources, materials and technology in the classroom relate to the content or current unit studied, are accessible to all students and are intentionally used by teacher to support learning."	"The resources, materials and technology in the classroom relate to the content or current unit studied, are accessible to all students and are intentionally used by both teacher and student to support learning. Students are familiar and comfortable with using the available resources."
Centering instruction on high expectations for student achievement 	C1	5	"CEC3    Classroom Environment & Culture – Classroom Routines & Rituals: Discussion, collaboration and accountability"		"Routines for discussion and collaborative work are absent, poorly executed or do not hold students accountable for their work and learning."	"Routines for discussion and collaborative work are present, but may not result in effective discourse. Students are held accountable for completing their work but not for learning."	"Routines for discussion and collaborative work have been taught, are evident, and result in effective discourse related to the lesson purpose. With prompts, students use these routines during the lesson. Students are held accountable for their work and learning."	"Routines for discussion and collaborative work have been explicitly taught, are evident, and result in effective discourse related to the lesson purpose. Students independently use the routines during the lesson. Students are held accountable for their work, take ownership for their learning and support the learning of others."
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	3	CEC4    Classroom Environment & Culture – Classroom Routines & Rituals: Use of learning time 		"Teacher or students frequently disrupt or interrupt learning activities, which results in loss of learning time. Transitions are disorganized and result in loss of instructional time."	"Teacher or students occasionally disrupt or interrupt learning activities, which results in some loss of learning time. Some transitions are disorganized and result in loss of instructional time."	Learning time is mostly maximized in service of learning. Transitions are teacher-dependent and maximize instructional time.	"All available time is maximized in service of learning. Transitions are student-managed, efficient, and maximize instructional time."
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	4	CEC5    Classroom Environment & Culture – Classroom Routines & Rituals: Managing student behavior		Teacher rarely or never responds to student misbehavior by following classroom routines and/or building discipline procedures. Student behavior does not change or may escalate.	"Teacher responds to student misbehavior by following classroom routines and/or building discipline procedures, but with uneven student behavior results."	Teacher responds to student misbehavior by following classroom routines and building discipline procedures. Student misbehavior is rare.	"Teacher responds to student misbehavior by following classroom routines and building discipline procedures. Student behavior is appropriate. Students manage themselves, assist each other in managing behavior, or there is no student misbehavior."
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	5	CEC6    Classroom Environment & Culture – Classroom Culture: Student status		Teacher does not develop appropriate and positive teacher-student relationships that attend to students’ well-being. Patterns of interaction or lack of interaction promote rivalry and/or unhealthy competition among students or some students are relegated to low status positions.	Teacher demonstrates appropriate teacher-student relationships that foster students’ well-being. Patterns of interaction between teacher and students may send messages that some students’ contributions are more valuable than others.	Teacher and students demonstrate appropriate teacher-student and student-student relationships that foster students’ well-being and adapt to meet individual circumstances. Patterns of interaction between teacher and students and among students indicate that all are valued for their contributions.	Teacher and students demonstrate appropriate teacher-student and student-student relationships that foster students’ well-being and adapt to meet individual circumstances. Patterns of interaction between teacher and students and among students indicate that all are valued for their contributions. Teacher creates opportunities for students’ status to be elevated.
"Fostering and managing a safe, positive learning environment"	C5	6	CEC7    Classroom Environment & Culture – Classroom Culture: Norms for learning		"Classroom norms are not evident and/or do not address risk taking, collaboration, respect for divergent thinking or students’ culture."	"Classroom norms are evident and encourage risk taking, collaboration, respect for divergent thinking and students’ culture. Teacher and student interactions occasionally align with the norms."	"Classroom norms are evident and encourage risk taking, collaboration, respect for divergent thinking and students’ culture. Teacher and student interactions frequently align with the norms."	"Classroom norms are evident and encourage risk taking, collaboration, respect for divergent thinking and students’ culture. Teacher and students refer to the norms and/or interactions consistently align with the norms. Students remind one another of the norms."
Providing clear and intentional focus on subject matter content and curriculum	C4	2	CP1    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Curriculum: Alignment of instructional materials and tasks		Instructional materials and tasks rarely or never align with the purpose of the unit and lesson.	Instructional materials and tasks align with the purpose of the unit and lesson.	Instructional materials and tasks align with the purpose of the unit and lesson. Materials and tasks frequently align with student’s level of challenge.	Instructional materials and tasks align with the purpose of the unit and lesson. Materials and tasks consistently align with student’s level of challenge.
Providing clear and intentional focus on subject matter content and curriculum	C4	3	CP2    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Teaching Approaches and/or Strategies: Discipline-specific conceptual understanding		Teacher rarely or never uses discipline-specific teaching approaches and strategies that develop students’ conceptual understanding.	Teacher occasionally uses discipline-specific teaching approaches and strategies that develop students’ conceptual understanding.	Teacher frequently uses discipline-specific teaching approaches and strategies that develop students’ conceptual understanding.	Teacher consistently uses discipline-specific teaching approaches and strategies that develop students’ conceptual understanding.
Providing clear and intentional focus on subject matter content and curriculum	C4	4	CP3    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Teaching Approaches and/or Strategies: Pedagogical content knowledge		Instruction is rarely or never consistent with pedagogical content knowledge and does not support students in discipline-specific habits of thinking.	Instruction is occasionally consistent with pedagogical content knoweldge and supports students in discipline-specific habits of thinking.	Instruction is frequently consistent with pedagogical content jnwoeldge and supports students in discipline-specific habits of thinking.	Instruction is always consistent with pedagogical content knowledge and supports students in discipline-specific habits of thinking.
Providing clear and intentional focus on subject matter content and curriculum	C4	5	CP4    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Teaching Approaches and/or Strategies: Teacher knowledge of content		Teacher demonstrates a lack of knowledge of discipline-based concepts by making content errors.	Teacher demonstrates a basic knowledge of how discipline-based concepts relate to or build upon one another.	Teacher demonstrates a solid understanding of how discipline-based concepts relate to or build upon one another. Teacher identifies and addresses student misconceptions in the lesson or unit.	Teacher demonstrates an in-depth understanding of how discipline-based concepts relate to or build upon one another. Teacher identifies and addresses student misconceptions that impact conceptual understanding over time.
Recognizing individual student learning needs and developing strategies to address those needs.	C3	4	CP5    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Teaching Approaches and/or Strategies: Differentiated instruction		Teacher rarely or never uses strategies that differentiate for individual learning strengths and needs.	Teacher occasionally uses strategies that differentiate for individual learning strengths and needs.	Teacher frequently uses strategies that differentiate for individual learning strengths and needs.	Teacher consistently uses strategies that differentiate for individual learning strengths and needs.
Demonstrating effective teaching practices 	C2	4	CP6    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Scaffolds for Learning: Scaffolds the task		Teacher rarely or never scaffolds tasks for group or individual learning needs or teacher uses strategies that are generic and/or not relevant to the concepts and/or skills to be learned.	Teacher provides limited scaffolds for individual or group learning needs. Strategies may or may not be relevant to the concepts and/or skills to be learned.	Teacher provides scaffolds and structures that are clearly related to and support the development of the targeted concepts and/or skills.	Teacher provides scaffolds and structures that are clearly related to and support the development of the targeted concepts and/or skills. Students use scaffolds across tasks with similar demands.
Demonstrating effective teaching practices 	C2	5	CP7    Curriculum & Pedagogy – Scaffolds for Learning: Gradual release of responsibility		Teacher rarely or never uses strategies for the purpose of gradually releasing responsibility to students to promote learning and independence.	Teacher occasionally uses strategies for the purpose of gradually releasing responsibility to students to promote learning and independence.	Teacher frequently uses strategies for the purpose of gradually releasing responsibility to students to promote learning and independence.	Teacher consistently uses strategies for the purpose of gradually releasing responsibility to students to promote learning and independence. Students expect to be self-reliant.
Centering instruction on high expectations for student achievement 	C1	1	"P1    Purpose – Standards: Connection to standards, broader purpose and transferable skill"	"Possible Teacher Observables: 
A 6th grade teacher presents a lesson on the American Revolution. Content and skills are 5th grade standards.
A 6th grade teacher presents a lesson on African geography that meets 6th grade standards. Lesson is not connected to a broader purpose such as how African geography is important to the current economics of the continent or how the skills learned will apply to a subsequent geography lesson.  There is no learning target.
"	The lesson is not based on grade level standards.  There are no learning targets aligned to the standard. The lesson does not link to broader purpose or a transferable skill. 	The lesson is based on grade level standards and the learning target(s) align to the standard. The lesson is occasionally linked to broader purpose or a transferable skill. 	The lesson is based on grade level standards and the learning target(s) align to the standard. The lesson is frequently linked to broader purpose or a transferable skill. 	The lesson is based on grade level standards and the learning target(s) align to the standard. The lesson is consistently linked to broader purpose or a transferable skill. 
Providing clear and intentional focus on subject matter content and curriculum	C4	1	P2    Purpose – Standards: Connection to previous and future lessons		The lesson is rarely or never linked to previous and future lessons.	The lesson is clearly linked to previous and future lessons.	Lessons build on each other in a logical progression.	The lesson is clearly linked to previous and future lessons. Lessons build on each other in ways that enhance student learning. Students understand how the lesson relates to previous lesson.
Recognizing individual student learning needs and developing strategies to address those needs.	C3	1	P3    Purpose – Teaching Point: Teaching point(s) are based on students’ learning needs		"Teacher rarely or never bases the teaching point(s) on students’ learning needs – academic background, life experiences, culture and language."	"Teacher bases the teaching point(s) on limited aspects of students’ learning needs – academic background, life experiences, culture and language."	"Teacher bases the teaching point(s) on the learning needs – academic background, life experiences, culture and language – for some groups of students."	"Teacher bases the teaching point(s) on the learning needs – academic background, life experiences, culture and language – for groups of students and individual students."
Centering instruction on high expectations for student achievement 	C1	2	P4    Purpose – Learning Target: Communication of learning target(s) 		Teacher rarely or never states or communicates with students about the learning target(s).	Teacher states the learning target(s) at the beginning of each lesson.	Teacher communicates the learning target(s) through verbal and visual strategies and checks for student understanding of what the target(s) are.	"Teacher communicates the learning target(s) through verbal and visual strategies, checks for student understanding of what the target(s) are and references the target throughout instruction."
Centering instruction on high expectations for student achievement 	C1	3	P5    Purpose – Learning Target: Success criteria and performance task(s)		The success criteria for the learning target(s) are nonexistent or aren’t clear to students.	The success criteria for the learning target(s) are clear to students. The performance tasks align to the success criteria in a limited manner.	The success criteria for the learning target(s) are clear to students. The performance tasks align to the success criteria.	The success criteria for the learning target(s) are clear to students. The performance tasks align to the success criteria. Students refer to success criteria and use them for improvement.
Exhibiting collaborative and collegial practices focused on improving instructional practice and student learning.	C8	1	PCC1    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Professional Learning and Collaboration: Collaboration with peers and administrators to improve student learning		Teacher rarely or never collaborates with peers or engages in reflective inquiry for the purpose of improving instructional practice or student learning.	Teacher collaborates and engages in reflective inquiry with peers and administrators for the purpose of improving instructional practice and student learning. Teacher provides minimal contributions.	Teacher collaborates and engages in reflective inquiry with peers and administrators for the purpose of improving instructional practice and student learning. Teacher contributes to collaborative work.	"Teacher collaborates and engages in reflective inquiry with peers and administrators for the purpose of improving instructional practice, and student and teacher learning. Teacher occasionally leads collaborative work."
Exhibiting collaborative and collegial practices focused on improving instructional practice and student learning.	C8	2	PCC2    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Professional Learning and Collaboration: Professional and collegial relationships		"Teacher rarely or never develops or sustains professional and collegial relationships for the purpose of student, staff or district growth. Teacher may subvert professional and collegial relationships."	"Teacher develops limited professional and collegial relationships for the purpose of student, staff or district growth."	"Teacher develops and sustains professional and collegial relationships for the purpose of student, staff or district growth."	"Teacher develops and sustains professional and collegial relationships for the purpose of student, staff or district growth. Teacher serves as a mentor for others’ growth and development."
Communicating and collaborating with parents and the school community.	C7	1	PCC3    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Communication and Collaboration: Parents and guardians		Teacher rarely or never communicates in any manner with parents and guardians about student progress.	"Teacher occasionally communicates with all parents and guardians about goals of instruction and student progress, but usually relies on only one method for communication or requires support or reminders."	Teacher communicates with all parents and guardians about goals of instruction and student progress and uses multiple tools to communicate in a timely and positive manner. Teacher effectively engages in two-way forms of communication and is responsive to parent and guardian insights.	Teacher communicates with all parents and guardians about goals of instruction and student progress using multiple tools to communicate in a timely and positive manner. Teacher considers the language needs of parents and guardians. Teacher effectively engages in two-way forms of communication and is responsive to parent and guardian insights.
Communicating and collaborating with parents and the school community.	C7	2	PCC4    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Communication and Collaboration: Communication within the school community about student progress		Teacher maintains minimal student records. Teacher rarely communicates student progress information to relevant individuals within the school community.	"Teacher communicates student progress information to relevant individuals within the school community; however, performance data may have minor flaws or be narrowly defined (e.g., test scores only)."	"Teacher maintains accurate and systematic student records. Teacher communicates student progress information to relevant individuals within the school community in a timely way, accurately, and in an organized manner, including both successes and challenges."	Teacher maintains accurate and systematic student records. Teacher communicates student progress information to relevant individuals within the school community in a timely way. Teacher and student communicate accurately and positively about student successes and challenges.
Exhibiting collaborative and collegial practices focused on improving instructional practice and student learning.	C8	3	"PCC5    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Professional Responsibilities: Supports school, district, and state curriculum, policy and initiatives"		"Teacher is unaware of or does not support school, district, or state initiatives. Teacher violates a district policy or rarely or never follows district curriculum/pacing guide."	"Teacher supports and has a basic understanding of school, district, and state initiatives. Teacher follows district policies and curriculum/pacing guide."	"Teacher supports and has solid understanding of school, district, and state initiatives. Teacher follows district policies and implements district curricula and policy. Teacher makes pacing adjustments as appropriate, to meet whole group needs without compromising an aligned curriculum."	"Teacher supports and looks for opportunities to take on leadership roles in developing and implementing school, district, and state initiatives. Teacher follows district policies and implements district curricula and policy. Teacher makes pacing adjustments as appropriate to meet whole group and individual needs, without compromising an aligned curriculum."
Exhibiting collaborative and collegial practices focused on improving instructional practice and student learning.	C8	4	PCC6    Professional Collaboration & Communication – Professional Responsibilities: Ethics and advocacy		"Teacher’s professional role toward adults and students is unfriendly or demeaning, crosses ethical boundaries, or is unprofessional."	"Teacher’s professional role toward adults and students is friendly, ethical, and professional and supports learning for all students, including the historically underserved."	"Teacher’s professional role toward adults and students is friendly, ethical, and professional and supports learning for all students, including the historically underserved. Teacher advocates for fair and equitable practices for all students."	"Teacher’s professional role toward adults and students is friendly, ethical, and professional and supports learning for all students, including the historically underserved. Teacher advocates for fair and equitable practices for all students. Teacher challenges adult attitudes and practices that may be harmful or demeaning to students."
Demonstrating effective teaching practices 	C2	1	SE1    Student Engagement – Intellectual Work: Quality of questioning		Teacher rarely or never asks questions to probe and deepen students’ understanding or uncover misconceptions.	Teacher occasionally asks questions to probe and deepen students’ understanding or uncover misconceptions.	Teacher frequently asks questions to probe and deepen students’ understanding or uncover misconceptions. Teacher assists students in clarifying their thinking with one another.	Teacher frequently asks questions to probe and deepen students’ understanding or uncover misconceptions. Teacher assists students in clarifying and assessing their thinking with one another. Students question one another to probe for deeper thinking.
Recognizing individual student learning needs and developing strategies to address those needs.	C3	2	SE2    Student Engagement – Intellectual Work: Ownership of learning		"Teacher rarely or never provides opportunities and strategies for students to take ownership of their own learning to develop, test and refine their thinking."	Teacher occasionally provides opportunities and strategies for students to take ownership of their learning. Locus of control is with teacher.	Teacher provides opportunities and strategies for students to take ownership of their learning. Some locus of control is with students in ways that support students’ learning.	Teacher consistently provides opportunities and strategies for students to take ownership of their learning. Most locus of control is with students in ways that support students’ learning.
Centering instruction on high expectations for student achievement 	C1	4	SE3    Student Engagement – Engagement Strategies: High cognitive demand		Teacher expectations and strategies engage few or no students in work of high cognitive demand.	Teacher expectations and strategies engage some students in work of high cognitive demand.	Teacher expectations and strategies engage most students in work of high cognitive demand.	Teacher expectations and strategies engage all students in work of high cognitive demand.
Recognizing individual student learning needs and developing strategies to address those needs.	C3	3	SE4    Student Engagement – Engagement Strategies: Strategies that capitalize on learning needs of students		"Teacher rarely or never uses strategies based on the learning needs of students – academic background, life experiences, culture and language of students."	"Teacher uses strategies that capitalize and are based on learning needs of students – academic background, life experience and culture and language of students – for the whole group."	"Teacher uses strategies that capitalize and are based on learning needs of students – academic background, life experiences, culture and language of students – for the whole group and small groups of students."	"Teacher uses strategies that capitalize and build upon learning needs of students – academic background, life experiences, culture and language of students – for the whole group, small groups of students and individual students."
Demonstrating effective teaching practices 	C2	2	"SE5    Student Engagement – Engagement Strategies: Expectation, support and opportunity for participation and meaning making"		Teacher rarely or never uses engagement strategies and structures that facilitate participation and meaning making by all students. Few students have the opportunity to engage in quality talk.	Teacher uses engagement strategies and structures that facilitate participation and meaning making by students. Some students have the opportunity to engage in quality talk.	Teacher sets expectation and provides support for a variety of engagement strategies and structures that facilitate participation and meaning making by students. Most students have the opportunity to engage in quality talk.	Teacher sets expectation and provides support for a variety of engagement strategies and structures that facilitate participation and meaning making by students. All students have the opportunity to engage in quality talk. Routines are often student-led.
Demonstrating effective teaching practices 	C2	3	SE6    Student Engagement – Talk: Substance of student talk		Student talk is nonexistent or is unrelated to content or is limited to single-word responses or incomplete sentences directed to teacher.	"Student talk is directed to teacher. Talk associated with content occurs between students, but students do not provide evidence for their thinking."	Student-to-student talk reflects knowledge and ways of thinking associated with the content. Students provide evidence to support their thinking.	Student-to-student talk reflects knowledge and ways of thinking associated with the content. Students provide evidence to support their arguments and new ideas.
