c1r1tx:'Principals articulate and model a shared mission, vision, beliefs, and goals throughout the entire school community.'
c1r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c1r1l2:'? Understands the importance for a school to have a shared mission, vision, beliefs, and goals. ? Possesses well-defined ideals and beliefs about schools and schooling that align with the District Strategic Plan.                                                                      ? Understands the characteristics of a collaborative work environment.'
c1r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Leads the development of a shared mission, vision, beliefs, and goals for the school aligned with the School Improvement Plan (SIP) and the District Strategic Plan. ? Communicates shared mission, vision, beliefs, and goals to the district and community stakeholders.                                                                                     ? Creates an environment of collaboration and trust throughout the school.'
c1r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Continually evaluates the shared mission, vision, beliefs, and goals for the school that are aligned with the SIP and the District Strategic Plan and makes adaptations as appropriate. ? Ensures that mission, vision, and goals drive decision-making and school culture.                                                                                                       ? Facilitates and sustains an environment of collaboration and trust to positively impact student achievement.'
c1r1ex:'Examples of Evidence: SIP, belief statements, Professional Learning Community (PLC) summary, collaboration minutes, newsletters, agendas, surveys, signs/posters of vision, mission'
c2r1tx:'Principals provide for a safe and orderly environment.'
c2r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c2r1l2:'? Understands district policies and procedures regarding school safety. ? Implements district policies and procedures regarding school safety. ? Understands district policies and procedures regarding student discipline. ? Implements district policies and procedures regarding student discipline.'
c2r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Reviews, analyzes, and implements school safety and discipline plans based on school data. ? Establishes and enforces policies and routines that maximize opportunities for all students to learn.'
c2r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Ensures an orderly environment to maximize student learning.'
c2r1ex:'Examples of Evidence: Discipline/incident data, safety meeting agendas/minutes, referral data, drill documentation, surveys of parents, parent communications, systems documents'
c3r1tx:'Principals lead the development, implementation and evaluation of a data driven plan. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c3r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c3r1l2:'? Knows the district-adopted SIP format and procedures. ? Communicates to the entire school community the importance of developing a data-driven plan. ? Leads and guides the development of a data driven-plan using multiple sources of data. ? Identifies benchmark data points to be used in evaluating the effectiveness of the School Improvement Plan.'
c3r1l3:'. . . and ? Continues to monitor and adjust the effectiveness of the plan using current data from multiple sources. ? Provides support to teachers to implement the data-driven plan at the classroom and school level. ? Prioritizes the appropriate use of resources to support the data-driven plan. ? Facilitates the successful execution of the School Improvement Plan.'
c3r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Ensures that the goals of the School Improvement Plan are implemented with fidelity and monitored frequently. ? Builds a school community where stakeholders are encouraged to understand and have a voice in evaluating the effectiveness of the School Improvement Plan. ? Models a commitment to continuous improvement through analysis of data.'
c3r1ex:'Examples of Evidence: SIP, leadership team notes, newsletters, data, school websites, assessment walls, agendas, leadership minutes'
c4r1tx:'Principals are able to communicate research-based best practices for curriculum, instruction and assessment to staff in order to improve student learning. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c4r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c4r1l2:'? Possesses knowledge of state learning goals. ? Initiates formal and informal discussions that address curriculum, instruction, and assessment issues. ? Possesses knowledge of best practice of instruction and assessment. ? Encourages and supports meaningful professional learning opportunities. ? Recognizes a variety of formative and summative assessments for the diagnosis of learner needs. ? Sets expectations that teachers implement appropriate learning interventions to improve student learning.'
c4r1l3:'<b>...and</b>  ? Guides and/or instructs professional learning activities to address curriculum, instruction, and assessment issues that build on teachers’ strengths in reaching all students. ? Ensures discussions occur regarding student work within and across teams. ? Engages with staff in meaningful professional learning. ? Monitors teachers’ implementation of learning interventions and provides support when necessary.'
c4r1l4:'<b>...and</b>  ? Models knowledge of research-based best practice and expects staff to have an understanding of curriculum alignment processes within and across curriculum areas and grade levels. ? Ensures that staff have multiple and various learning experiences to promote best practice.'
c4r1ex:'Examples of evidence: Collaboration documentation, leadership team or staff meeting agendas/minutes, staff handbook, rubrics, best practice initiatives, walk through data, book studies'
c5r1tx:'Principals monitor, assist, and evaluate the implementation of effective instruction and assessment practices and the impact on student learning. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c5r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c5r1l2:'? Understands the importance of both formal and informal monitoring practices. ? Communicates knowledge of instruction, assessment and evaluation. ? Recognizes the components of a quality lesson.'
c5r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Uses a variety of formal and informal monitoring practices. ? Initiates opportunities for teachers to engage in professional dialog and activities to support instruction and assessment practices. ? Provides opportunities for targeted professional learning as appropriate.'
c5r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Monitors the fidelity and consistency of the implementation of research-based practice. ? Empowers staff to reflect on the instructional skills and knowledge needed to positively impact student achievement.'
c5r1ex:'Examples of evidence: SIP, assessment analysis, lesson plan analysis, informal observations, formal observations, documented conversations'
c6r1tx:'aPrincipals establish processes for making sound budget decisions. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c6r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c6r1l2:'? Assesses the resource needs of teachers and staff. ? Understands the importance of clear expectations, structures, and procedures for managing fiscal resources. ? Understands the school funding, budget development, and budget management processes. ? Understands the importance of non-fiscal resources (e.g., personnel, time, materials, etc.) in the effectiveness of a school.'
c6r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Allocates material resources in ways which support student achievement. ? Allocates professional learning resources in ways which support student achievement. ? Allocates and protects time resources in ways which support student achievement.'
c6r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Implements procedures that ensure the long-term viability of effective programs and practices. ? Implements process for input on resource allocation and budgetary decisions. ? Communicates the structure and rationale for decisions about resource allocation.'
c6r1ex:'Examples of evidence: SIP, budget plan, leadership team agendas/minutes, surveys, examples of protocol, Associated Student Body (ASB) protocols'
c6r2tx:'b. Principals establish and follow standard operating principles and routines for recruitment, hiring, and supporting staff, and for implementing the district’s personnel evaluation system. Unsatisfactory (Comment required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c6r2l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c6r2l2:'? Understands the importance of effectively recruiting, hiring, and mentoring new staff members. ? Adheres to district policy for teacher and staff evaluation. ? Understands the importance of clear expectations, structures, and procedures for managing human resources.'
c6r2l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Uses hiring protocols that reflect student achievement goals. ? Implements district personnel evaluation policies in a fair and equitable manner. ? Implements and enforces policies and procedures. ? Uses the hiring processes strategically to further the school’s vision and mission.'
c6r2l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Facilitates ongoing support for new staff members and those who are taking on new or additional responsibilities and leadership roles. ? Optimizes the school’s human capital and the intangible assets of staff members to maximize opportunities for student achievement. ? Systematically reviews and adjusts expectations and procedures on an ongoing basis.'
c6r2ex:'Examples of evidence: Knowledge of teacher contract, interview question bank, evidence of available trainings, evidence of systems in place, meeting notes of conversations'
c7r1tx:'a. Principals establish strong lines of communication with parents, stakeholders, teachers, staff, and students. Principals keep lines of communication open and serve as an advocate and spokesperson for the school to all stakeholders. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c7r1l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c7r1l2:'? Understands the importance of open, effective communication between and within school and district administration ? Responds to parents, teachers, and patrons in a timely manner. ? Communicates with stakeholder groups about school initiatives and activities.'
c7r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Uses a variety of formats to communicate about student learning with stakeholders within and outside the school. ? Uses effective communication skills and strategies to: ? Enlist community support. ? Resolve conflicts among individuals and groups. ? Build common focus and collaboration to enhance student learning.'
c7r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Systematically monitors and takes steps to ensure improved communication with the school community at large. ? Models effective communication and expects staff to also communicate on a regular basis.'
c7r1ex:'Examples of evidence: Surveys, newsletters, logs, evidence of procedures in place, information dissemination processes, evidence of clear expectations for staff'
c7r2tx:'b. Principals partner with the school community to promote student learning. Principals implement structures and processes which result in parent and community engagement and support. Unsatisfactory (Comment Required) Developing Proficient Accomplished'
c7r2l1:'? Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c7r2l2:'? Acknowledges the importance of engaging stakeholder groups in meaningful ways.'
c7r2l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Provides opportunities for stakeholder groups to become involved in the school. ? Collaborates with administrative colleagues.'
c7r2l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Optimizes stakeholder involvement to provide learning opportunities for staff and students. ? Engages the school community in the implementation of district strategic plan.'
c7r2ex:'Examples of evidence: Logs of community presence at school activities, meeting sign-in sheets, e-mail/correspondence, newsletters, meeting minutes, agendas, outreach activities, personal logs of communication, school calendars'
c8r1tx:'Principals demonstrate a commitment to closing achievement gaps.'
c8r1l1:'Not demonstrated at this time. or ? Unsatisfactory.'
c8r1l2:'? Understands relevant research on the achievement gap. ? Communicates and models the ideals and beliefs that teachers and staff can impact student learning and achievement for all students. ? Engages in frequent quality interactions with underperforming students. ? Understands how to use data to identify achievement gaps.'
c8r1l3:'<b>...and</b> ? Implements school-wide practices that foster understanding and respect for cultural diversity, celebrates the contributions of diverse groups, and addresses closing the achievement gap. ? Analyzes multiple data sources of sub-population groups of students to set targeted SIP goals and apply intervention programs to close achievement gaps. (Including effects of poverty, trauma, homelessness, etc.) ? Actively participates in the development of district goals, strategic planning, and initiatives designed to improve student achievement and address achievement gaps.'
c8r1l4:'<b>...and</b> ? Continuously works with staff to increase staff understanding of how to close the achievement gap. ? Works to build the collective efficacy of staff through shared understandings about students. ? Systematically monitors student achievement of underperforming populations of students. ? Optimizes school programs and community resources to integrate community, family language, and culture into the school to support the students' academic progress.'
c8r1ex:'Examples of Evidence: SIP, Title I compacts, parent meetings, surveys, staff meeting minutes, professional development agendas, translated documents, phone logs, staff handbooks, Response to Intervention (RTI) models, Student Information System (SIS) data, Student Study Team (SST) minutes, multi-cultural activities or awareness'
